Title: A short statement on the Adria Richards / Pycon incident
Date: 2013-04-15 13:52
Slug: a-short-statement-on-the-adria-richards-pycon-incident

A few weeks ago I watched in depressed fascination at the internet
explosion about Adria Richards and her reaction to offensive comments
made in the audience of the Pycon conference. (If you would like more
information on this incident I would suggest starting with the [Guardian
article](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/mar/26/adria-richards-gets-rape-threats-for-speaking-out-about-workplace-sexism).
) Although I did contemplate writing something about it, I felt that I
didn’t have anything new or constructive to say. I don’t really have
anything terribly enlightening to say now, but I do feel the need to
state my opinions.

</p>

For me, the supreme issue here is the appalling internet attacks on Ms
Richards, which included a barrage of viciousness that included rape
threats, death threats, publishing her private information, and a DDOS
attack on her employer. In the discussion over these events, many people
have spent energy discussing such things as whether the jokes that
triggered all this were truly offensive, and whether Ms Richards’s
reaction was appropriate. Even if we were to accept that her action, a
tweet including a photograph of the jokers, was an overreaction which
violated reasonable etiquette - any wrong that she had done is
insignificant compared to the wrong heaped upon her by those attacks.

</p>

I have long despaired of the [net
nastiness](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/NetNastiness.html) that hangs
over our profession and how its alienating atmosphere contributes to our
[diversity
imbalance](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/DiversityImbalance.html). This
incident sadly makes clear the misogynistic streak in the tech world and
further deters women from speaking out against it. I have no solutions
to offer, but will continue to listen to historically disadvantaged
groups and hope to be able to support those trying to correct these
problems. I know that many of my colleagues at ThoughtWorks are also
eager to see this disease eradicated and for our profession to actually
approach being the meritocracy it likes to think it is.

</p>

I would also like to state a loud “+1” to Alexis Ohanian for [eloquently
expressing much of my
feelings](http://alexisohanian.com/dear-fellow-geeks-what-the-fuck).

</p>

